---
layout: post
title:  "Caeser Cipher - Cryptanalysis"
categories: [Cryptography Ground Up]
tags: [crypto]
draft: true
---

## Introduction

Over the last two posts we've covered two different monoalphabetic ciphers; the Caeser cipher and the Affine cipher. In the next few posts we're going to look at cryptanalysis of monoalphabetic ciphers using Caeser & Affine examples, we're also going to write a little bit of code for the programmer/ctfer type.

### Brute Force Attacks

Most notably we have the "brute force attack" or as I much prefer to call it the "exhaustive key search attack" - against something like Caeser, this attack is **very** effective. I mean after all there are only 26 unique keys so it wouldn't take long (even on pen & paper) to try all keys i.e, an exhaustive key search. You might be wondering, if it's that easy, what's the point of this post? Good question, let's actually get into an example with code.

Let's take the plaintext `linxzs blog is amazing` this is a very small amount of text so something like letter frequency analysis might be harder but it doesn't matter, we're using Caeser there's only 26 different positions. For this example we will use a shift of 6. So with a shift of 6 our plaintext `linxz blog is amazing` becomes `rotdfy hrum oy gsgfotm` how would we bruteforce this? Well, we'd take all possible key values, apply them to our ciphertext until we get a readable message, seems easy, right? Well, it is but it is even easier to do with code and I'll show you how much easier now.








The most known type of a cryptanalysis attack is a "brute force attack" and the premise is very simple; do some computation over & over again until you get the original result; with modern ciphers this is what we call "computationally infeasible" i.e; it's computationally inefficient/impossible for us to carry out this attack and get the result we want; that result being the original/plaintext message.

Now, how does a brute force attack work? Well, it's quite simple let's take a look. We will take **all possible** keys and we will try to use those keys to recover the original message based on the ciphertext this can also be known as an "exhaustive key search"; I much prefer this term to "brute force attack" but both work, I guess, depends how pedantic you're feeling! :D
