---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to Cryptography Part II"
categories: [Cryptography]
tags: [crypto]
draft: true
---

# Disclaimer

I am **not** a Cryptographer, I am **not** a Cryptography student, Cryptology is **not** my discipline. Please note that there is no guarantee that everything in this series of blog posts is/will be correct, I cannot be held accountable for you implementing a poor crypto system because you decided to do no further reading than my posts. Crypto is a very hard discipline, it takes years & years to get it **right.** Just keep this in mind when reading my posts, thanks! With that said, I will do my absolute best to ensure that every post is 100% accurate!

## Introduction

In todays entry we're going to look at a few things starting off with some basic notation that is quite important for you to know! 

## Principles of Cryptography

It can be said that cryptography has four main principles, or rather it has four tasks which it sets itself to achieve, these are: confidentiality, integrity, authentication and non-repudiation. You're going to hear these a lot as you venture through InfoSec so you better get used to them! (I personally actually hate hearing this spiel of terms however as I said, you need to get used to them as they're said a lot throughout InfoSec)

1. Confidentiality - used in order to prevent disclosure of information to unauthorized parties, we can achieve this by using cryptographic algorithms to encrypt the data. Making it unintelligible to everyone except those who are authorised to view the material.

2. Integrity - used in order to ensure consistency and accuracy of data during its life time. By using a digital signature or by hashing the received data and comparing the hash value with the original hash value.

3. Authentication - used in order to confirm that a part is the party you actually want to be communicating with. In order to achieve this we can use many methods such as a pre-shared key, public/private key cryptography we could also do this using a message authentication code (MAC) which will allow us to verify the message came from the stated sender (more on MAC later)

4. Non-repudiation - used to confirm that an entity had involvement in some communication preventing a party denying they ever sent a message this can also be done using a digital signature.

It could be said that there are more principles of cryptography such as accessibility, authorization and more however, I think we have covered the main four in some detail and throughout the blog series we will cover them in a lot more depth; specifically we will dive into the maths behind the algorithm and the algorithm design on a whole.


## Notation
